---
layout: default
title: Learning from Teaching Evaluations
---
Due to an application for another teaching fellow (TF) position, I had occasion
to go back and look at my evaluations from TF-ing in the fall. They were
positive but contained some well-deserved suggestions for improvement. No lie,
it's tough (probably because it's infrequent) to read anonymous and no-holds-
barred comments about your own teaching style. But I'm glad that this was my
first course and I have plenty of time to improve those aspects and keep getting
stronger in my areas of strength. Here are some action points that I've
abstracted out from the subject matter of that course ("Shakespeare: Histories
and Tragedies").

- **Don't undermine your own authority.** My department assigns TF positions
somewhat arbitrarily and I remarked in passing during section that I had less
expertise in Shakespeare/theater than in American Lit (my specialty). Bad idea!

- **Always deliver a takeaway.** While conversation by and among *students* is
the goal of section, they still need to leave feeling as if they learned
something. I always prepared topics but needed to prioritize going over at least
one of those topics, rather than letting the discussion flow freely but with
less structure.

- **Always return materials when you say you will.** No excuse for this. Even a
couple of days matters.

- **Don't give differential effort.** It's perhaps human nature to be more alert
when being observed, but I am striving to be the kind of teacher who gives the
same (high!) level of effort in all situations.

On the positive side, 

> [Stephen] made section fun and useful and sections at Yale are never fun or
> useful.

> Stephen was an effective TA--warm and thoughtful. He did a great job bringing
> interesting and often unexpected outside materials into section.

Oh, and I should note that my professor's main constructively-critical tip was
to watch out for mumbling! Got it. Loud and clear. Can't wait to improve all
these areas next time I TF.

For the moment, I'm co-teaching a seminar entitled "The Grid: Data, History,
Visualization" and it's going amazingly well. I feel an ownership in the content
and thus am fully engaged. But being a good teacher means a commitment to effort
and excellence in all situations.

Forward!
